
### Project summary

A unique feature of the city of Edmonton is the interconnected network of natural green spaces known as the Ribbon of Green (RoG). The Ribbon of Green extends 48 km along the North Saskatchewan River through the heart of downtown Edmonton. While the woods, parks, and trails within this network provide outdoor recreation opportunities for Edmontonians, they also function as ecological corridors–broad pathways through which animals can safely move through the city. Common wildlife includes white-tailed deer, coyote, and black-capped chickadees. The ease with which wildlife can move through these corridors is not the same everywhere. Human infrastructure–roads, residential communities, parking lots, and buildings–can constrict the movement of animals into narrow pinch points. The City of Edmonton has identified pinch point locations, but the local conditions constraining them remain unclear. What causes a pinch point? A road, a river, a housing development? This project attempted to find out.

I gathered a variety of digital maps that capture key features thought to be important influences on ecological connectivity. Maps included environmental data (dominant tree species, topography, and habitat classifications) and human footprint (roads, cultural and historical resources, buildings, and parks infrastructure). Using a free statistical program called R, I used these maps to (1) characterize the area within and surrounding known movement pinch points in Edmonton, (2) develop new exploratory tools and maps, and (3) develop a methodological workflow for analyzing pinch points that can apply to various sections of the Ribbon of Green and iterated on in future models.
I used a variety of statistical and spatial analysis techniques to characterize pinch points and identify patterns in their composition, including simple linear regressions, spatial overlay analysis, principal components analysis (PCA), and agglomerative hierarchical cluster analysis. Through this, I identified clusters of similar pinch points and generated summary tables and digital maps describing pinch point characteristics. Four unique kinds of pinch points were identified: (1) non-vegetated and highly developed, (2) grassland and cropland dominant, (3) next to natural water bodies, and (4) highly vegetated and dominated by natural woodlands.

These outputs are via this application. A corresponding online tutorial describing the methods to characterize pinch points is available at https://bookdown.org/bgcasey/RV_connectivity. The tutorial links to the code and digital maps I used, allowing planners to both reproduce and iterate on my workflow.

Given the results, I suggest that management efforts target non-vegetated pinch points dominated by human infrastructure and those with high percentages of adjacent grassland. For pinch points influenced mainly by the North Saskatchewan River, consider limiting new human features that could further limit connectivity. Highly vegetated pinch points require more study. In-person site surveys may find connectivity barriers missing from the spatial layers used in this project.

As ecological corridors abut Edmonton’s urban fabric and intersect with recreation trails and public parks, these products may be useful for increasing understanding of the important management tradeoffs between human use and wildlife connectivity in Edmonton.